Right.
I'm ready. This is Alan Vine speaking. Perhaps one
of the most important things to talk about next
that affected some of our business and certainly
the kind of work I was doing was when Thrasher sank.
This was in the spring of 1963, a
most unfortunate
event. Our
ship,
a real few hours after it sank, I believe it was Art
Maxwell from ONR called me up. let me know what had
happened. Our ship, the Atlantis that was
Atlantis II that was on its maiden voyage, was
operating up in the Gulf of Maine only about 50
miles away. We were able to get it detoured, get
hold of it and get it detoured over. and got
messages off to that as
to where the ship was, what kind of equipment was
aboard, and what they might be able to do. And the
ship was basically at his service in any way that he
could use it. But meanwhile, it would go about
doing oceanographic surveys of the area until
told to do something else.
There are several parts about the Thresher
sinking which were important to oceanography.
One, the whole oceanographic game had gotten much
larger than it was during the war and after the war.
It had gotten much more bureaucratic.
Organizations had naturally gotten much more
self-centered. Individuals had tended to get
more self-centered. And many of us had commented
on whether that spirit of cooperation that was
exhibited during World War II would ever show
again.
Here at Woods Hole, it certainly did. We got calls
from a great many places, for example, Bucky
Buchanan NRL called up and said, you're the
closest laboratory to the ship. We don't know what
will happen, but it's almost certain that your
place will tend to be a headquarters. I've loaded
two trucks, 10-ton trucks up with equipment that
you might be able to use, and it's on its way. A
representative of the Texas National Guard
called up and said, we understand you people are
involved in the search, and some of it's being
based out of Woods Hole. We want you to know the
Texas National Guard has the following kinds of
aircraft. Any of these are available at any time,
any place, any job. This number will be a good 24
hours a day.
A taxi driver who was supposed to pick up a piece of
apparatus in Boston and bring it down hadn't shown
up in the two and a half hours. We were getting a
little disgusted when he arrived at the
laboratory. His taxi had broken down halfway down
here, and he left to the side of the road and
hitchhiked down with a package because he felt it
was needed.
This kind of cooperation went on throughout the
Thrasher search. and by a great many people, a
great many places. And it was one of the positive
things that came out of the search. It made us all
realize that
when the crunch comes, people will cooperate.
At a fairly early date, within a few days after the
Thrasher sank and the Navy had appointed Captain
Frank Andrews to be the on-scene commander.
Frank called me up to see if I would join him
basically as his technical advisor. He had been in
the Submarine Development Group 2 in New London.
which I want to say something else about later. I
forgot that important place. And he wanted to have
someone
both as a technical aide and also someone who was
sufficiently acquainted with the oceanographic
community so that he would know where we could get
more help. All of the laboratories that had ships
converged on the area. This is not the place to try
and describe the Thresher search, except to say
that about five ships were involved
intermittently from the laboratories. Each
technique that was felt to be promising was
whipped out, utilized as well as practical. And
then when either those people got tired out or they
lost their gear, why then another ship would come
in to continue or try another technique. There are
many lessons to be learned in that. in that
unfortunate affair. After being on scene about
two weeks,
the Chief of Naval Operations set up a committee
under Admiral Ed Steffen, who had been
oceanographer of the Navy and had been a very
important person in
re-cementing the relationships between the
oceanographic community and the Navy's
oceanographic office.
So I left the unseen part of the Thrasher search and
went to Washington and joined in with a committee
which varied from anywhere between 10 and 30
people, depending upon the times, see what one,
really to write up a plan and a set of
recommendations for the Navy as to how the search
should be conducted, the rescue should be
attempted, salvage should be undertaken, and so
forth, if such a thing happened again. This
committee went on at rather full strength and high
steam about two and a half months. And at least that
much longer was taken in sort of writing it up and
assembling it. The best people in the country that
were knowledgeable in such subjects were brought
together in that committee. And a rather
extensive report was put out Unfortunately, most
of that report was classified, because
it had to do so much with submarine operations. But
the general principles came out in a wide variety
of reports by individuals who had attended the
meetings.
Bad days in Washington then was when we were at the
Naval Gun Factory was the news that Kennedy had
been assassinated. And like nearly all other
activities and groups in Washington, one just
kind of shook your head and went home for a while.
Okay,
let's start in here. One, to backtrack a bit in the
late 50s, the Academy of Sciences under the
chairmanship of Harrison Brown, had a third
National Academy of Sciences Committee on
Oceanography.
Harrison had asked me if I would chair a panel on
equipment, which ended up by being called the
Panel on New Devices. And I had the very great
pleasure of being chairman of that. being
involved with that. And Harrison took the
attitude that he wanted his panel chairman to—he
hoped they would attend all meetings and that they
would also feel free to cast votes on all problems
in which they legally could. And he didn't want to
run the committee in such a fashion that there
would be votes in which it wasn't perfectly legal
for them to do so. As an individual, this gave me an
opportunity to work even more closely with with
many fine oceanographers that I already knew very
well, but it also permitted me to get acquainted
with quite a few more oceanographers that I didn't
know very well. This committee can be described a
little bit as taking about, there were about 30
three-day weekend meetings in which work was the
was the general tenor and that usually included
about two of those knights.
That committee in which Harrison Brown did such a
good job of keeping
keeping his eye on the ball of not only what needed
to be done, but also very much how it had to be
managed and done. And he was as much interested in
the congressional aspect of it as he was in the
oceanographic aspect. In other words, the
chairman's concern, to a large extent, was how do
science and government work together.
One of the more interesting and lovable people on
the committee was Sumner Pike, who had been one of
the original
members of the Atomic Energy Commission. He came
from an old fishing family up in Lubeck, Maine. And
perhaps his stature and personality could be best
described by saying that a couple of times I saw him
sort of talk to Ewing and Revelle and Islin as
though they were a little bit small boys, and he did
it in such a lovely style that they took it just like
nice small boys should take it.
Sumner had a wealth of experience in politics,
mining, fishing, and just human nature.
Everybody on that committee, I think, felt that
they probably learned as much from Sumner as from
anybody else. But to get back to perhaps the more to
somewhat the more technical points that I was
involved with.
The committee of about half a dozen people,
Jim Snodgrass from Scripps,
Jim Lipp, who was corporate head of corporate
planning for Lockheed, kindly took membership
because he thought it would be a very interesting
thing to do. And while he was more used to working in
millions rather than thousands,
his good common sense and his larger perspective
was extremely important. Bob Frosch was a member
and Andreas Rechnitzer.
The goal for that particular piece of chapter was
to try and see what kind of equipments were going to
be necessary and optimum to carry out
oceanography, both at a larger scale and also with
a great deal more finesse.
Here was another place to inject the fact that
ships were needed, a logical array of ships. There
was a ship chapter, which I spent a great deal of
time on. Also, the question of navigation was very
important. And I would like to mention one aspect
of that which is perhaps an example of how things
frequently get done. It was well known that the
Navy was operating with or working on a transit
navigation system, which was classified. And oh,
I can't think of the fellow's name from John
Hopkins University, who did the primary work on
that. But he came up to Woods Hole and gave a lecture
on
the principles of the system.
And he felt very strongly that one might be able to
make a much simpler transit navigational
receiver if one was willing to put up with a
correspondingly larger error. Well,
oceanographers who didn't have very good
navigation, and when you wander around a week or
two in the fog, your navigation is almost
non-existent, anything looked very good to us.
The Navy Department officially wanted to have no
real part of this. They felt that their prize
people should be sticking on to the under their
job. Not that they were really against it so much,
but they wanted progress in their own field. What
our committee conjured up was the following
concept. We would write the director of each of the
larger oceanographic institutions
to see if they would be willing to commit a sum of
twenty thousand dollars for an experimental
navigational transit system in which there was no
guarantee as to
how precise it would be. There was no guarantee as
to whether it would work at all. And there was no
guarantee as to whether they would ever even get
it.
We sent this out, and in his usual exhilaration to
move forward, Ewing had his letter back in about 48
hours from Lamont and said that if it was
permissible to ask for two, he would guarantee
$40,000, one for each ship. Well, armed with
guarantees of $100,000, we could then go to the We
could then go to the John Hopkins group.
They, in turn, could go to the Navy and say that we
now have enough money to do the design work if you
will permit us to work on it. This got us over enough
of an administrative hurdle to where those in the
Navy that thought it was a fine idea could win, and
they gave him authorization to go ahead,
providing it didn't interfere with his other
work. It turned out that the design of these went
very rapidly and very well, and soon they became
available for oceanographers to use. In
actuality, the Navy, of course, did not want to
take our $20,000 apiece because that would have
had some obligation that we could then keep it. So
they just loaned us the units to use, and our
$100,000 bluff paid off. We not only got free
instruments, but... It also turned out that a new
instrument had been developed for the
oceanographic game.
This was parlayed on further at the international
oceanographic meeting that was going to be held in
Europe. Dr. Wakelin, who was then Under Secretary
of the Navy, cooperated very much on this, as he was
at many levels of research, and he was staying in
close contact with oceanography and the
Oceanographic Committee. He got authorization
to announce at this international meeting that
these equipments that we had that had been built
for American oceanography were going to be made
available to the world at large. And this was one of
the major breakthroughs in civilian navigation.
Since that time, the equipments have become much
smaller, much simpler, much cheaper, and much
more accurate. And they are now sort of the
standard navigational, the most standard
navigational system for high seas navigation.
I also want to add here that the man in the committee
that carried the ball principally on this was Jim
Snodgrass, but it was one of the kinds of things
that all of us spent a great deal of time on because
we felt it was so important that it was worthwhile
dropping almost any other problem if that one
needed carried along. The general problem of how
one uses, how one probably used buoys at sea was and
how one gets financed for developing buoys for sea
and using buoys for measurement at sea received
great impetus from this.
Buoys, we had used buoys at Woods Hole a good deal. I
had used some. Many others had. Scripps was using
them. primarily in the weapons test to measure
fallout on the Pacific. Had I mentioned that
earlier? I think this deserves a little special
merit because at Woods Hole, there was the great
tendency to look at buoys as a way to make
subsurface measurements. At Scripps, there was
more of a tendency to use them for making
measurements of nuclear fallout after the tests,
so they were more interested in the surface
phenomena, but they were also interested in a very
much larger area, in huge areas of the Pacific.
these effects and trends showed up because in
later years the Scripps buoy program covered
large sections of the Pacific and being more
surface oriented they made cheaper buoys and they
got more out that had to do with surface phenomena
and meteorological phenomena and these served as
a large part of the database in which the
magnificent work that, under the sponsorship of
Jerome Nimaeus, was later able to carry out in
weather prediction, the influence of
large-scale eddies and temperature anomalies in
the Pacific.
This, I think, was one of the fallouts, eventual
fallouts, of that program. which certainly was
not predictable in detail, but was predictable in
the sense that Bowie feels would make it possible
to do things like this. And from the standpoint of
the world at large, this has probably been by all
odds the most important contribution of Bowie's
to date. And it's one part of it that I think all of us
who were on that committee
felt very good about. Also in this era, our
technological approach of working on the nuts and
bolts of research had helped produce budgets and
ships and was doing this. we had simple buoys on the
way. It was also very important to try and get a, see
how stable you could make a ship.
There's nothing in Newton's laws that says ships
have to rock and roll, and at a somewhat earlier
date, I had been down in New London one time looking
at the two submarine hulls, which had been
completed during the war and nothing had been put
in them. And it certainly appeared that there
should be a better use for those submarine hulls
than going into razor blades. And so one bitter
cold night driving back to New London coming
through Taunton, I suddenly came to that if you put
one of those on end, that...
the natural heave period would be longer than that
of the waves, and it should be a very stable
platform.
Pieces of this, I guess without any question,
were original with me, but the fundamental
thinking about it was on wave measurement buoys,
which had been built by a variety of people and had
been pushed very hard
John Holmes, a technical man who had been working
with us and with me at Woods Hole. Anyhow, I did get a
report out on that, and it was one of the kinds of
things that quite a few oceanographers talked
about as a good thing to do. Well, we pushed this
sort of a stable platform in our committee. We
didn't know just when it would get done, but the
principles were there. How do we get a technical
base for oceanography that is commensurate with
the improved fiscal base and the large number of
fine new people that were coming into the
business? And one of the things that the increase
in money did is it produced, it gave not only new
people, but it started bringing in people from
other fields. And as such, the game became
somewhat less incestuous than it had been before.
Actually, in following this stable buoy program
up, a few years later, in a committee called Navy
committee called the Stag Committee, which was,
its purpose was to see if sound went straight under
the ocean. And if you ever tried to find a target
with a piece of sonar gear, would it actually be
where you thought it was going to be? Well, it was
necessary to make some very precise horizontal
measurements. And one of the key committee
members Fred Spies from Scripps was
involved in this. So what we did is we dusted out the
earlier tentative proposals for a vertical spar
buoy. He got a contract and did design work and
turned it into what is now known as FLIT, which has
been amazingly successful.
Flip is a nice illustration of a basic concept that
has been kicking around for heaven knows for how
long. Holmes and others had put it into very
effective use for measurement programs on a small
scale of 10 to 20 feet long.
I thought of taking something as crude as a
submersible hole, which is of course not too
crude, and doing it with that. And had certainly
intended that it would be rotated so that you could
operate it horizontally and then flip it up. But
what Spiess and the Scripps crowd did was they put
in that lovely piece of finesse to build it so it
could be flipped several times during a day if
needed. So if there was something wrong with it,
something wrong with the bottom, you could flip it
up and fix it. And that was one of the things that
made it truly operational. So you could bring it
into port every night if you wanted to. I hope we
will see much more of stable ships, because I'm
sure it is ridiculous to always bounce and rock and
roll on the surface, just because most ships are
designed to rock and roll, and sure enough, they
do. Let's shut it off.
one of the chapters of this report had to do with the
disposal of nuclear waste had to do with
radioactivity in the ocean of which some of the
And at that stage of the game, it was very apparent
that radioactivity in the ocean was not being
looked at as hard as it should be, that
the high level waste products would almost
certainly require
much more much more knowledge about their fate and
what one might do with them, engineering-wise,
than had been done. Atomic Energy Commission had
informal representatives in the group. They
worked very well. Ravel was particularly
interested in this problem, as was Benny
Schaefer.
There was some discussion as to whether
submersibles shouldn't be in a much wider variety
of uses here, and whether the Atomic Energy
Commission shouldn't
be one of the sponsors of submersibles, because
that would be one of the ways to determine the fates
of radioactivity in the bottom.